The OneSearch Research Assistant, a tool powered by Generative AI, assists researchers in searches of library materials. You can use it to ask academic questions in natural language, such as "What are the benefits of light therapy on mood?" or "What are the musical influences of Zydeco?"
The Research Assistant uses article, book, and book chapter metadata and abstracts to identify up to five documents that address your question. It then extracts the most relevant information from the description/abstracts of each source to write a brief overview of those documents.
Please keep in mind that for the most part, the Research Assistant only can assess electronic books and book chapters and that information available in older print books may not be included in results.
If you are logged into your OneSearch / Library account, you can save queries and responses from session to session. If not logged in, previous queries are only stored until the end of your search session. You may opt out of or delete stored queries at any time.
Please keep in mind that the topic summaries are AI-generated and are not intended to replace resource sources, only to describe them.
Use the copy icon to save the overview summary and list of top recommended resources.
The answer overview you receive is not retrievable by other researchers. It is intended to provide you with an overview of relevant sources and to guide you to the full articles or books. Please check with your instructor about permitted used of AI-generated text. You can read more about how to cite AI-generated text in our FAQ.
View our OneSearch FAQs.
Click the thumbs up / down icons to send your feedback to the OneSearch Provider
Or email us at refer@uark.edu with your feedback.
EBSCO AI Insights provide concise summaries for research articles, with 3-5 key points given for each work.
AI Insights summaries are generated by prompting a Large Language Model to summarize insights from the specific article the user selected AI Insights for. The AI Insight prompt uses a method called Retrieval Augmented Generation (RAG) to reduce hallucinations. EBSCO also reviews a representative sample of AI Insights with Subject Matter Expert (SME) Human-in-the-Loop (HITL) for biases, tone, accuracy, and timeliness of Insights as a quality and responsible AI metric. See: Artificial Intelligence AI Transparency Fact Sheet – AI Insights for more information.
In any EBSCO database in the search results list. Not all articles will have an AI Insights tab; the tab will generally appear for full text articles from scholarly journals, unless the articles are too short to be evaluated.
AI Insights are not saved when you export records or full text.
AI Insights are regenerated with each search and are not reproduceable. Please check with your instructor about permitted used of AI-generated text and refer to our AI citation guide if use is allowed.
Read the EBSCO information page for AI Insights.
Use the Yes / No buttons at the bottom of each summary
Or
Email us at refer@uark.edu with your feedback.
The EBSCO Natural Language Search (NLS) allows you to ask research questions in your own words, and get results using matching synonyms or concepts. This tool is still in development.
The NLS uses AI to better parse your query into keyword and phrases structured in a way that the EBSCO search engine can understand. The parsed query is then sent to the EBSCO search engine that performs the same relevancy ranking, filtering, and other specialty search functionality as traditional search.
In any EBSCO database, go to Basic Search and then switch the button for Natural Language Search.
Read the Natural Language Search beta study.
Mintel Leap allows you to search for reports and analysis using natural language queries and to receive suggestions on related topics and searches.
Leap uses AI (ChatGPT LLM) to transform your question into terms and phrases in the Mintel database, then create a summary of Mintel Insights reports matching your search criteria.  According to Mintel, as of September 2025, Leap has ingestednalyst insights, including reports and trends, including Databooks.  ."Leap references insights and Databooks from the last 30 months to date. Where an insight is published regularly, such as every year, Leap's responses always reference the latest version of the insight."  (from Leap Help section) 
All of the insights that were used to generate the response are referenced in the footnotes. You can hover over a footnote later on to see the insight that part of the response is taken from. You can then also click on any footnote to open the respective insight section in a new tab.
 
Leap is a conversational tool, so responses will be based on your original question during your search session. Click the New Chat button to start a new search topic.
In Mintel, choose the tab for Leap.
Click on the copy icon to save the summary and source list to your clipboard. You can share this content with UARK students, faculty, and staff but please be aware that commercial use is not allowed.
In Mintel Leap, click the ? help button for tips on constructing prompts and in-depth information about the mechanics of the tool.
Click the thumbs up / down icons to send your feedback to Mintel.
Ovid AI Article Summaries (BETA) is designed to capture key elements and takeaways from selected articles.
Ovid does not provide in-depth information on their AI model but the results appear to be based on the full HTML text of the article.
AI Article Summaries will appear on the HTML full text page (not the PDF) for research articles in most Lippincott journals. A full list of these journals can be found on the Ovid support site.
Ovid AI Article Summaries are not saved when you export records or full text.
Ovid AI Article Insights are regenerated with each search and are not reproduceable. Please check with your instructor about permitted used of AI-generated text and refer to our AI citation guide if use is allowed.
Watch the video What is the Ovid AI Article Summary feature?
Use the thumbs up / thumbs down icons at the bottom of each summary.
Key takeaways summaries and topic suggestions are based on a textual analysis of the article full text or abstract.
Key takeaways suggest related resources and searches are based on the current document and other documents in the ProQuest index that share keyword terms and abstract details.
Use the copy icon to save Key Takeaways to your clipboard.
Visit the ProQuest Help Center Research Assistant FAQs.
Click the thumbs up / down icons to send your feedback to ProQuest.
SciFinder uses AI to enhance search relevancy, to summarize results, and to suggest additional resources or search terms under the umbrella term of the "SearchSense" service.
Using human-curated search strings and phrases, SciFinder searching now supports natural language queries or searching on any form of a substance name.
On the All and References pages for optimized searches with at least 5 results, SciFinder will present an AI summary and key findings of the search topic, based on top results.
CAS uses AI to recognize the fields being searched, such as author, patent number, or reactions, and to provide the appropriate citations matching your search terms. Through concept-indexing functionality, SciFinder will recognize common phrases and redirect your search to controlled vocabulary matching that concept or phrase.
In natural language or structure searches of at least 5 matching records, an AI Summary appears at the top of the All and References pages.  "The summary presents a quick overview of the literature space, providing both high-level overviews and more detailed information, which is generated by AI models trained by scientists focusing on scientific accuracy and traceable citations."  The AI model is trained only on SciFinder content.  
Clicking View All will display "Key Findings" with linked results to relevant publications.  
Natural language searching is incorporated into the basic search bar.
AI Summaries are found at the top of All or Reference results.
You can copy and paste the AI Summary but the linked references are not copies
AI Summaries are regenerated with each search and are not reproduceable. Please check with your instructor about permitted used of AI-generated text and refer to our AI citation guide if use is allowed.
CAS offers several information pages on AI tools in SciFinder:
Use the thumbs up / thumbs down icons at the bottom of each AI summary to send feedback to CAS.
Web of Science Smart Search matches your search words and author names to documents and researchers in the database and offers recommended search terms from the Web of Science indexes. Smart Search can also translate queries from selected languages.
In November 2025, Smart Search will become the default search for Web of Science; advanced search will still be available.
Your search query is processed by the Web of Science Natural Language Processing (NLP) parser, which identifies key entities such as author names, topics, and researcher IDs to ensure accurate retrieval.
The parsed information is used to build a structured Web of Science (WOS) query to retrieve either documents or researchers.
Boolean operators AND, OR, NOT and phrases can be understood by Smart Search.
In Web of Science, choose the tab for Smart Search.  
Visit the Web of Science Help Center article on Smart Search.