Critical Information Literacy is "a theory and practice that considers the sociopolitical dimensions of information and production of knowledge, and critiques the ways in which systems of power shape the creation, distribution, and reception of information" (Drabinski and Tewell, 2019).
Information, in other words, is never "unbiased." Human creators of information have biases based on their own lived experiences or perspectives. Human receivers of information also have biases - for example, "confirmation bias" when you seek information that reinforces your existing beliefs (Mynatt et al, 1977), or "cognitive dissonance" when information does not align with your beliefs (Festinger, 1957). Biases are embedded in the ways that information is distributed - for example, who decides what kinds of information gets published or archived, or how search engines rank pages to display in a results list.
Multiple studies have documented how technologies perpetuate systemic biases and inequalities in our societies. In her pioneering book Algorithms of Oppression: How Search Engines Reinforce Racism (2018), digital media scholar Safiya Noble famously analyzed Google search results from 2009-2015 to demonstrate how search engines were not neutral, but reinforced racist and sexist biases.
The Large Language Models (LLMs) underlying chatbots are trained on large data sets that contain biases that we (the end user) are not able to evaluate. The seminal research paper "On the Dangers of Stochastic Parrots: Can Language Models Be Too Big?" demonstrates how large data sets "overrepresent hegemonic viewpoints and encode biases potentially damaging to marginalized populations" (Bender, et al., 2021, p. 610). In other words, LLMs are trained on data that likely reproduce historical biases or may include overt hate speech or misinformation.
When used in chatbots, these LLMs can produce or amplify sexist, abelist, racist, or other harmful ideologies when responding to user queries (Bender et al, 2021, p. 617). Omiye, et al's "Large Language Models Propagate Race-Based Medicine" (2023) demonstrates how the integration of Gen-AI tools into healthcare systems can further discriminate against persons of color in medicine. When used in workforce recruitment and resume screening, Gen-AI tools can perpetuate gender, age, and ableist biases (Glazko et al., 2024).
In the conversation surrounding AI, the text produced by chatbots is often presented as the result of machine intelligence only. However, journalists have shown that AI text is not only the work of machines. Instead, the work of many human laborers is essential to the text generated by ChatGPT and other chatbots. According to an investigative report, "Behind even the most impressive AI systems are people — huge numbers of people labeling data to train it and clarifying data when it gets confused" (Dzieza, 2023).
How do humans contribute to the work of generative AI?
The human labor used to train generative AI models is often outsourced to underpaid workers in the Global South. For instance, workers in Kenya were paid less than $2 an hour to label disturbing toxic content (Perrigo, 2023). Some academics refer to these practices as "digital neocolonialism": Western tech companies exploit the labor and natural resources (for example, minerals used in computer hardware) of poor nations in the Global South, further perpetuating the legacy of colonialism (Browne, 2023). Initiatives like the Data Workers’ Inquiry help to share firsthand stories from global data workers.
Drabinski, Emily, and Eamon Tewell. “Critical Information Literacy.” In The International Encyclopedia of Media Literacy, edited by Renee Hobbs and Paul Mihailidis, 1st ed., 1–4. Wiley, 2019.
Festinger, Leon. A Theory of Cognitive Dissonance. Evanston, Ill: Row, Peterson, 1957
Gupta, Anuj, Yasser Atef, Anna Mills, and Maha Bali. “Assistant, Parrot, or Colonizing Loudspeaker? ChatGPT Metaphors for Developing Critical AI Literacies.” Open Praxis 16, no. 1 (2024): 37–53.
Mynatt, Clifford R, Michael E Doherty, and Ryan D Tweney. “Confirmation Bias in a Simulated Research Environment: An Experimental Study of Scientific Inference.” Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology 29, no. 1 (1977): 85–95.
Bender, Emily M., Timnit Gebru, Angelina McMillan-Major, and Shmargaret Shmitchell. “On the Dangers of Stochastic Parrots: Can Language Models Be Too Big?" In FAccT ‘21: Proceedings of the 2021 ACM Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency, 610-623.
Browne, Grace. “AI Is Steeped in Big Tech’s ‘Digital Colonialism.’” Wired, May 25, 2023.
Buolamwini, Joy. Unmasking AI: A Story of Hope and Justice in a World of Machines. New York: Random House, 2023.
Glazko, Kate, Yusuf Mohammed, Ben Kosa, Venkatesh Potluri, and Jennifer Mankoff. “Identifying and Improving Disability Bias in GPT-Based Resume Screening.” In FAccT ‘24: Proceedings of the 2024 ACM Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency, 687–700.
“How Artificial Intelligence Bias Affects Women and People of Color.” UCB-UMT, December 8, 2021.
Lizarraga, Lori. “How Does a Computer Discriminate?” NPR Code Switch, November 8, 2023.
Noble, Safiya Umoja. Algorithms of Oppression: How Search Engines Reinforce Racism. New York: University Press, 2018.
Omiye, Jesutofunmi A., Jenna C. Lester, Simon Spichak, Veronica Rotemberg, and Roxana Daneshjou. “Large Language Models Propagate Race-Based Medicine.” NPJ Digital Medicine 6, no. 1 (2023): 1–4.
Browne, Grace. "AI is Steeped in Big Tech's 'Digital Colonialism.'" Wired, May 25, 2023.
Distributed AI Research (DAIR) Institute. Data Workers’ Inquiry.
Dzieza, Josh. "AI is a Lot of Work." The Verge, June 20, 2023.
Perrigo, Billy. "OpenAI Used Kenyan Workers on Less Than $2 Per Hour to Make ChatGPT Less Toxic." TIME, January 18, 2023.
Off-campus? Please use the Software VPN and choose the group UCIFull to access licensed content. For more information, please Click here
Software VPN is not available for guests, so they may not have access to some content when connecting from off-campus.

-     Locations
- Connect From Off-Campus
- Hours
- Accessibility
- Accounts
- Giving
Recipient's email: 
    Email this link:
The following are some of the initiatives, documents, or tools related to Generative AI from various UCI campus units.
- 
    
Educause 2025 Horizon Report: Teaching and Learning Edition This link opens in a new tabThe Horizon Report is an annual publication from Educause that identifies trends and directions in higher education. Significant sections of the 2025 report address Generative AI in education.
- 
    
Ithaka S+R Generative AI Product Tracker This link opens in a new tabIthaka S+R, a nonprofit research and consulting service in higher education and libraries, maintains a Generative AI Product Tracker, which is regularly updated and informs faculty and students about GenAI tools and products specifically relevant to higher education.
- 
    
University of Texas at Austin AI Opportunity Inventory This link opens in a new tab"The AI Opportunity Inventory is [...] designed to identify, catalogue, and analyze artificial intelligence use cases that have the potential to meaningfully contribute to major societal goals." The stated audience for this resource includes researchers, policymakers, and civil society organizations.
- Last Updated: Jul 9, 2026 12:08 PM
- URL: https://guides.lib.uci.edu/gen-ai
- Print Page
Off-campus? Please use the Software VPN and choose the group UCIFull to access licensed content. For more information, please Click here
Software VPN is not available for guests, so they may not have access to some content when connecting from off-campus.

This research guide provides an overview of how Generative AI (Gen-AI) tools and processes are changing our global information ecosystem. It addresses key issues such as misinformation, bias, and ethical challenges for the purpose of furthering inquiry into information literacy in light of these new technologies.
We foreground these questions in this guide:
If you are more interested in learning about using specific AI tools in academic research, see the AI in Research guide.
Common terms used in this guide:
Artificial Intelligence (AI): "The capacity of computers or other machines to exhibit or simulate intelligent behavior." (Oxford English Dictionary, n.d.)
Generative AI (Gen-AI): A type of AI technology that generates content such as text, images, audio, and video. Also sometimes referred to as a generator.
Large Language Model (LLM): A complex model trained on vast amounts of data that generates language that resembles human-generated language. Open AI's GPT series (powering ZotGPT, Microsoft CoPilot, and PapyrusAI), Google's Gemini, and Meta's LLaMA are examples of LLMs.
Chatbot: A computer program that uses an LLM to simulate a conversation with human users, typically through typed text in a software application.
Algorithm: A set of instructions or rules for performing a computation. Developers typically design algorithms used in AI to progressively iterate themselves, which we can consider a form of machine learning.
Training: The process of supplying algorithms with large data sets, and then "teaching" them to develop progressively sophisticated outputs for their intended purpose.
Definitions are adapted from the "Defining AI and Chatbots" page of the Artificial Intelligence Teaching Guide, Stanford Teaching Commons
The following 5-minute video provides an overview of what LLMs are and how they work in Generative AI chatbots like Google Bard (now Gemini), ChatGPT, and ZotGPT.
Nield, David. “How ChatGPT and Other LLMs Work—and Where They Could Go Next.” Wired, April 30, 2023.
Roose, Kevin. “How Does ChatGPT Really Work?” The New York Times, March 28, 2023.
Stöffelbauer, Andreas. “How Large Language Models Work.” Data Science at Microsoft, October 24, 2023.
Wolfram, Stephen. “What Is ChatGPT Doing … and Why Does It Work?” Stephen Wolfram Writings, February 14, 2023.
Dodge, Jesse, Maarten Sap, Ana Marasović, William Agnew, Gabriel Ilharco, Dirk Groeneveld and Matt Gardner. “Documenting Large Webtext Corpora: A Case Study on the Colossal Clean Crawled Corpus.” ArXiv, 2021.
Schaul, Kevin, Szu Yu Chen, and Nitasha Tiku. “Inside the Secret List of Websites That Make AI like ChatGPT Sound Smart.” Washington Post, April 19, 2023.
Off-campus? Please use the Software VPN and choose the group UCIFull to access licensed content. For more information, please Click here
Software VPN is not available for guests, so they may not have access to some content when connecting from off-campus.

Many people are not aware of the extent of Generative AI’s energy consumption. Data centers that currently house Gen-AI servers consume enormous amounts of water in order to provide cooling for the servers, and the energy demands of Gen-AI are driving tech companies to seek out more energy sources, and therefore putting more strain on an environment already strained by climate change.
As companies continue to compete for market share of Gen-AI technologies and as Gen-AI tools become more customized and more multimedia, the energy demands only increase: a study from MIT calculates that by 2028, AI-specific power consumption will “rise to between 165 and 326 terawatt-hours per year…That could generate the same emissions as driving over 300 billion miles—over 1,600 round trips to the sun from Earth” (O’Donnell and Crownhart, 2025).
Even studies that argue that Gen-AI tools introduce benefits in that they may use less energy than human labor to do the same amount of work still concede that these technologies have substantial environmental impacts, and that it is improbable for Gen-AI tools to simply “replace human labor” entirely.
Recently, a $1.5 billion dollar class-action settlement between Claude Anthropic and book authors confirmed how LLMs can be trained on copyrighted works without permission. In the case of Claude Anthropic, an initial ruling found that Anthropic had downloaded 7 million books that they knew had been pirated. It is not clear whether other LLMs also train on pirated works, as the training datasets are not made public to users. The case against Anthropic is just one of many ongoing class action suits that authors have brought forth against Gen-AI companies.
Gen-AI authored content has raised questions about intellectual property and copyright frameworks in general. Existing models assume human authorship, but as humans employ more AI-generated content and tools into their work, the lines of authorship become blurred. The questions of authorship and training go beyond texts: AI-generated images and media present additional challenges to existing legal frameworks of intellectual property.
Increasingly, researchers have been investigating the impact of Gen-AI tools on research and education.
Within academic publishing and research, Gen-AI tools such as Perplexity, Research Rabbit, and others are increasingly being utilized by researchers to find and organize large amounts of information. At the same time, a growing number of publications are also suspected of including text generated by LLMs without including any statements disclosing the use of these tools. There is also concern that peer-reviewers are utilizing LLMs without disclosure, and consequently diluting the overall rigor of scientific publishing.
Within education, evidence is still mixed. Systematic reviews of studies suggest both positive and negative effects of student use of chatbots when it comes to student engagement and various measurements of student learning. Other studies suggest that Gen-AI tools provide opportunities for novel teaching approaches and enhanced collaborative learning, but emphasize the need for human oversight.
While Gen-AI tools are frequently credited with improving efficiency, a growing area of research asks whether this efficiency comes with measurable cognitive costs. In June 2025, a team of researchers from MIT published a groundbreaking study comparing brain waves of students who used chatbots with students who used search engines or students who used “brain alone” to write essays. It found “significant differences in brain connectivity: Brain-only participants exhibited the strongest, most distributed networks; Search Engine users showed moderate engagement; and LLM users displayed the weakest connectivity” (Kosmyna et al., 2025).
Crawford, Kate. "Generative AI's environmental costs are soaring -- and mostly secret." Nature, February 20, 2024.
Luccioni, Sasha, et al. “The Environmental Impacts of AI – Policy Primer,” Hugging Face Blog, 2024.
O’Donnell, James, and Casey Crownhart. “We Did the Math on AI’s Energy Footprint. Here’s the Story You Haven’t Heard.” MIT Technology Review, 20 May 2025. Accessed June 11, 2025.
Ren, Shaolei, Bill Tomlinson, Rebecca W. Black, and Andrew W. Torrance. "Reconciling the contrasting narratives on the environmental impact of large language models." Scientific Reports 14, no. 1 (2024): 26310.
Appel, Gil, Juliana Neelbauer, and David A. Schweidel. “Generative AI Has an Intellectual Property Problem.” Harvard Business Review, April 7, 2023.
Metz, Cade. “Anthropic Agrees to Pay $1.5 Billion to Settle Lawsuit With Book Authors.” Technology. The New York Times, September 5, 2025.
Schmelzer, Ron. “What Is The Future Of Intellectual Property In A Generative AI World?” AI. Forbes, July 18, 2024.
The Authors Guild. “Understanding the AI Class Action Lawsuits.” May 6, 2025.
Deng, Ruiqi, Maoli Jiang, Xinlu Yu, Yuyan Lu, and Shasha Liu. “Does ChatGPT Enhance Student Learning? A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis of Experimental Studies.” Computers & Education 227 (April 2025): 105224.
“How Much Research Is Being Written by Large Language Models?” Stanford University Human-Centered Artificial Intelligence, May 13, 2024.
Kosmyna, Nataliya, Eugene Hauptmann, Ye Tong Yuan, et al. “Your Brain on ChatGPT: Accumulation of Cognitive Debt When Using an AI Assistant for Essay Writing Task.” arXiv:2506.08872. Preprint, arXiv, June 10, 2025. 
.
Liang, Weixin, Yaohui Zhang, Zhengxuan Wu, et al. “Mapping the Increasing Use of LLMs in Scientific Papers.” arXiv:2404.01268. Preprint, arXiv, April 1, 2024.
Lo, Chung Kwan, Khe Foon Hew, and Morris Siu-yung Jong. “The Influence of ChatGPT on Student Engagement: A Systematic Review and Future Research Agenda.” Computers & Education 219 (October 2024): 105100.
Peláez-Sánchez, Iris Cristina, Davis Velarde-Camaqui, and Leonardo David Glasserman-Morales. “The Impact of Large Language Models on Higher Education: Exploring the Connection between AI and Education 4.0.” Frontiers in Education 9 (June 2024).
Stadler, Matthias, Maria Bannert, and Michael Sailer. “Cognitive Ease at a Cost: LLMs Reduce Mental Effort but Compromise Depth in Student Scientific Inquiry.” Computers in Human Behavior 160 (November 2024): 108386.
Off-campus? Please use the Software VPN and choose the group UCIFull to access licensed content. For more information, please Click here
Software VPN is not available for guests, so they may not have access to some content when connecting from off-campus.

“How do I know if I can trust the information produced by a chatbot?”
A lot of people have concerns about this question. Gen-AI tools produce a lot of information and often present the information confidently or authoritatively. The question of whether you can trust a chatbot's output is fundamentally a question about information literacy.
The Association for College and Research Libraries' (ACRL) Framework for Information Literacy for Higher Education defines Information Literacy as “the set of integrated abilities encompassing the reflective discovery of information, the understanding of how information is produced and valued, and the use of information in creating new knowledge and participating ethically in communities of learning.”
This definition is supported by the following framework of six interconnected concepts that point to knowledge practices and dispositions related to information literacy:
Furthermore, Critical Information Literacy is “a theory and practice that considers the sociopolitical dimensions of information and production of knowledge, and critiques the ways in which systems of power shape the creation, distribution, and reception of information” (Drabinski and Tewell, 2019).
Where does the information from a chatbot come from?
Chatbots like Open AI’s GPT series or Google’s Gemini are examples of tools powered by Large Language Models (LLMs). These LLMs are proprietary, and are trained on vast amounts of data using algorithms that are often invisible to us, the users.
Because the inner workings of these tools are invisible, it is difficult to understand how we can effectively determine the authority of information created by LLMs. Information created by humans “reflect their creators’ expertise and credibility, and are evaluated based on the information need and the context in which the information will be used” (ACRL Framework for Information Literacy, “Authority is Constructed and Contextual”). However, LLMs operate much like a “black box” - where users “can feed the system an input and receive an output, but you cannot examine the system’s code or the logic that produced the output” (Bagchi, 2023). In other words, the exact mechanisms that LLMs use to produce information are hidden.
And yet, Gen-AI tools can generate information that can appear credible. They can be prompted to cite sources. They may utilize language that conveys authority. Many times, the information produced is accurate, or at least partially accurate. But there are also ways in which the information can be wrong, even if it seems correct:
Misinformation is not unique to AI-generated content. Humans can also produce misinformation. However, as Emily Bender, a noted scholar on Generative AI, puts it: “Large language models are designed to make stuff up.” (Bender, 2023, emphasis added).
The following screenshot demonstrates how a chatbot can provide seemingly authoritative sources, mentioning academic databases like “PubMed, JSTOR, and Google Scholar” and thereby implying that the cited sources came from these databases. And yet, when asked for clarification, the chatbot admits that the source was “hypothetical and does not correspond to a specific, traceable academic publication.
Evaluating AI-generated information can be challenging. At a minimum, it is important to try to fact-check the information, because chatbots are known to “hallucinate” both information and sources.
One practical method that professional fact-checkers employ to verify online information is called “lateral reading,” where a source is evaluated against external sources, often by opening up multiple tabs laterally in a browser window. Traditionally, one of the first steps of lateral reading involves researching the author of the information to establish credibility or unearth specific biases. However, because AI-generated information has no “author,” researchers lose an important evaluation criteria. It can become difficult to determine which information to evaluate or verify unless the researcher already has some expertise in the content.
This short video demonstrates lateral reading in response to an essay generated by UCI’s ZotGPT (2024) about the role of the anteater in UCI’s history. This is an older version of ZotGPT, but the strategies of how one might use lateral reading to fact-check information still apply.
Association of College and Research Libraries. “Framework for Information Literacy for Higher Education." Accessed June 17, 2024.
James, Amy B., and Ellen Hampton Filgo. "Where Does ChatGPT Fit into the Framework for Information Literacy? The Possibilities and Problems of AI in Library Instruction" College & Research Libraries News, Volume 84 Number 9 (2023): 334-341.
Bagchi, Saurabh. “What Is a Black Box? A Computer Scientist Explains What It Means When the Inner Workings of AIs Are Hidden.” The Conversation, May 22, 2023.
Bender, Emily. “ChatGP-Why: When, If Ever, Is Synthetic Text Safe, Appropriate, and Desirable?” Presented at the Global Research Alliance for AI in Learning and Education (GRAILE), Global Research Alliance for AI in Learning and Education (GRAILE), August 8, 2023.
Park, Peter S., Simon Goldstein, Aidan O’Gara, Michael Chen, and Dan Hendrycks. “AI Deception: A Survey of Examples, Risks, and Potential Solutions.” arXiv (2023).
Walters, William H., and Esther Isabelle Wilder. “Fabrication and Errors in the Bibliographic Citations Generated by ChatGPT.” Scientific Reports 13, no. 1 (2023): 14045.
White, Jeremy. “See How Easily A.I. Chatbots Can Be Taught to Spew Disinformation.” The New York Times, May 19, 2024.
Off-campus? Please use the Software VPN and choose the group UCIFull to access licensed content. For more information, please Click here
Software VPN is not available for guests, so they may not have access to some content when connecting from off-campus.

This research guide provides an overview of how Generative AI (Gen-AI) tools and processes are changing our global information ecosystem. It addresses key issues such as misinformation, bias, and ethical challenges for the purpose of furthering inquiry into information literacy in light of these new technologies.
We foreground these questions in this guide:
If you are more interested in learning about using specific AI tools in academic research, see the AI in Research guide.
Common terms used in this guide:
Artificial Intelligence (AI): "The capacity of computers or other machines to exhibit or simulate intelligent behavior." (Oxford English Dictionary, n.d.)
Generative AI (Gen-AI): A type of AI technology that generates content such as text, images, audio, and video. Also sometimes referred to as a generator.
Large Language Model (LLM): A complex model trained on vast amounts of data that generates language that resembles human-generated language. Open AI's GPT series (powering ZotGPT, Microsoft CoPilot, and PapyrusAI), Google's Gemini, and Meta's LLaMA are examples of LLMs.
Chatbot: A computer program that uses an LLM to simulate a conversation with human users, typically through typed text in a software application.
Algorithm: A set of instructions or rules for performing a computation. Developers typically design algorithms used in AI to progressively iterate themselves, which we can consider a form of machine learning.
Training: The process of supplying algorithms with large data sets, and then "teaching" them to develop progressively sophisticated outputs for their intended purpose.
Definitions are adapted from the "Defining AI and Chatbots" page of the Artificial Intelligence Teaching Guide, Stanford Teaching Commons
The following 5-minute video provides an overview of what LLMs are and how they work in Generative AI chatbots like Google Bard (now Gemini), ChatGPT, and ZotGPT.
Nield, David. “How ChatGPT and Other LLMs Work—and Where They Could Go Next.” Wired, April 30, 2023.
Roose, Kevin. “How Does ChatGPT Really Work?” The New York Times, March 28, 2023.
Stöffelbauer, Andreas. “How Large Language Models Work.” Data Science at Microsoft, October 24, 2023.
Wolfram, Stephen. “What Is ChatGPT Doing … and Why Does It Work?” Stephen Wolfram Writings, February 14, 2023.
Dodge, Jesse, Maarten Sap, Ana Marasović, William Agnew, Gabriel Ilharco, Dirk Groeneveld and Matt Gardner. “Documenting Large Webtext Corpora: A Case Study on the Colossal Clean Crawled Corpus.” ArXiv, 2021.
Schaul, Kevin, Szu Yu Chen, and Nitasha Tiku. “Inside the Secret List of Websites That Make AI like ChatGPT Sound Smart.” Washington Post, April 19, 2023.
Off-campus? Please use the Software VPN and choose the group UCIFull to access licensed content. For more information, please Click here
Software VPN is not available for guests, so they may not have access to some content when connecting from off-campus.

As a student, am I allowed to use a Gen-AI tool like ZotGPT in my coursework?
The UCI Policy on Academic Integrity for students states:
“All students are expected to complete a course in compliance with the Instructor's standards. No student shall engage in any activity involving any Academic Integrity Policy Violations. No student shall engage in any activity that involves attempting to receive a grade by means other than honest effort, and shall not aid another student who is attempting to do so.”
Before you use any AI tool, ask yourself:
If you have any doubts, it is best to ask your instructor, and keep in mind that each course may have different standards of what might be acceptable.
If you are permitted to use an AI tool in your work and you have made the decision to use one, it may be a good idea to acknowledge your use as follows:
At this time, citing Generative AI is an evolving conversation, and some style guides have released official guidance on how to cite AI-generated text or images, while others have not. In addition, style guides have differing guidelines of whether tools (or companies) are “authors.”
Here are some examples of differences of how Gen-AI information might be cited in different style guides:
The APA released new guidelines for citing Generative AI in September, 2025. The guidance is detailed in three parts:
Example given from "Part 1 - Reference formats":
“Our prompt was ‘I’d like a list of grammar topics that a student should understand by the time they graduate from high school.’ In this scenario, we want to include those chats as references in a paper.”
References
Anthropic. (2025, May 20). Essential grammar topics for high school graduates [Generative AI chat]. Claude Sonnet 4. https://claude.ai/share/329173b2-ec93-4663-ac68-4f65ea4f166d
Google. (2025, May 22). High school grammar concepts overview [Generative AI chat]. Gemini 2.5 Flash. https://g.co/gemini/share/a1306ce12929
OpenAI. (2025, August 21). High school grammar concepts [Generative AI chat]. ChatGPT. https://chatgpt.com/share/68a77b60-0ee4-800c-9acc-cd3fd573c311
Perplexity AI. (2025, May 20). High school grammar topics [Generative AI chat]. Perplexity. https://www.perplexity.ai/search/a457cb8c-c663-4c9b-b34e-cb03d8108b35
The Chicago Style FAQ suggests that “conversations” with Gen-AI chatbots can be treated in a similar fashion to private emails or phone conversations that couldn’t be accessed by others. It recommends including information about how the AI tool was prompted, and suggests “you must credit ChatGPT when you reproduce its words within your own work, but unless you include a publicly available URL, that information should be put in the text or in a note–not in a bibliography or reference list.”
For example, if a prompt was not given in-text:
1. ChatGPT, response to “Explain how to make pizza dough from common household ingredients,” OpenAI, March 7, 2023.
The IEEE Editorial Style Manual for Authors (2023) does not offer any official guidance on citing AI-generated content. Some suggest treating AI-generated text similarly to private communication.
MLA revised specific guidance on citing Generative AI in 2025. Fundamentally, MLA uses a template of core citation elements that are flexible enough to accommodate citing AI-generated text or images. While MLA recommends that you do not treat an AI tool as an author, it suggests you should:
An example of a works cited entry for a paraphrase of text output by ChatGPT might look like this:
“Describe the theme of nature in Jane Austen’s Mansfield Park” prompt. ChatGPT, model GPT-4o, OpenAI, 23 Sept. 2024, chatgpt.com/share/66f1b0a0-d704-8000-be9a-85f53c850607
Off-campus? Please use the Software VPN and choose the group UCIFull to access licensed content. For more information, please Click here
Software VPN is not available for guests, so they may not have access to some content when connecting from off-campus.