The USC Center for Excellence in Teaching launched its Spring 2025 Faculty Showcase on AI in Teaching.  The showcase includes 18 videos on various AI topics and presented by USC Faculty and USC Libraries Faculty and Staff.
 
See Research Guide below for a listing of USC Centers where Faculty are working on numerous areas within the field of AI:
AI@USC in Benjamin Hall's Research Guide, Artificial Intelligence for Business .

This guide is a detailed overview of AI literacy that addresses technical, ethical, critical, and societal dimensions of AI in education in our current AI-embedded world.
            
        The list of books (all available online) appearing on this page (and listed in our USC Libraries Catalog) is offered simply as a minuscule exemplar of the current trends in AI teaching. Searches in the Research Databases listed in this Guide should yield a substantial amount of information and research results for both teaching and research on AI Teaching.
- 
    
Adopting Artificial Intelligence Tools in Higher Education by Thangavel Murugan (Editor); Karthikeyan Periasamy (Editor); A. M. Abirami (Editor)Call Number: Available ONlineISBN: 9781032744643Publication Date: 2025-01-24This book offers a modern exploration of the intersection of technology and education. It examines the prospects of integrating different AI tools into higher education and explores the challenges, opportunities, and innovative solutions for the different issues surrounding the use of AI in higher education. Each chapter discusses a different area where AI can enhance the educational landscape, such as AI integration in higher education and immersive virtual reality-based learning environments. The book also emphasizes student-centered learning, AI-powered frameworks for academic excellence, and learner-centric pedagogies. Furthermore, it delves into the role of AI in personalized learning in STEM courses, the development of AI-based tutoring systems, and the use of machine learning to identify students' mental health status. The volume concludes with "Dynamic Horizon," which examines how AI and gamification are shaping higher education. This book is essential for educators, administrators, researchers, and policymakers who want to leverage AI to create an adaptive, personalized, and engaging learning environment. Adopting Artificial Intelligence Tools in Higher Education provides valuable insights into the future of education, paving the way for a more empowered and enlightened academic world.
- 
    
AI and the Future of Education by Priten ShahCall Number: Available OnlineISBN: 9781394219261Publication Date: 2023-08-30AI and the Future of Education shows you that AI is a tool to leverage, not a threat to teaching and learning. By understanding what AI is, what it does, and how it can be used to enhance education, you can let go of anxiety and uncertainty, and learn to embrace artificial intelligence. It's true that, along with tremendous opportunities, AI presents some challenges for the field of education. In this book, Priten Shah, a Harvard M.Ed. with a robust background in educational innovation, helps you face these challenges head on, so you can gain the knowledge and skills you need to use AI effectively in your classroom. Thanks to this thorough consideration of ethical considerations and practical approaches, you can develop your own strategy for leveraging AI in administrative tasks, lesson design, professional development, and beyond. Understand what AI and machine learning are, and learn about new developments like ChatGPT Discover strategies for engaging students more fully using AI Automate administrative tasks, grading and feedback, and assessments Use AI in innovative ways to promote higher-order thinking skills Examine ethical considerations of AI, including the achievement gap, privacy concerns, and bias For K-12 educators, as well as leaders and policymakers who want to understand the role of technology in education, AI and the Future of Education is a valuable resource that can change AI from an unknown entity to an indispensable tool.
- 
    
Digital Feedback in Higher Education by Jennifer Schluer (Editor)Call Number: Available OnlineISBN: 9783839475713Publication Date: 2024-11-22The educational landscape is changing rapidly due to the digital transformation. The contributors to this volume teachers, researchers, and graduate students help to navigate the dynamic domain of digital feedback, adopting a multifaceted approach to innovative and interactive feedback practices in higher education. Emphasizing learner engagement, they discuss changes in teachers' roles as well as curriculum design, and place a special focus on the utilization of social media and artificial intelligence for feedback purposes. Altogether, this comprehensive, critical, creative, and collaborative exploration underscores the necessity of a continuous development and dialogue about digital feedback literacy.
- 
    
Generative AI in Higher Education - Innovation Strategies for Teaching and Learning by Adebowale Owoseni; Oluwaseun Kolade; Abiodun EgbetokunCall Number: Available OnlineISBN: 9783031601781Publication Date: 2024-09-19With the integration of generative artificial intelligence (AI), teachers and learners now have access to powerful tools to enhance their productivity and effectiveness in their work. To meet the demands of this dynamic educational landscape, teachers must embrace AI to handle repetitive tasks, freeing them to focus on more intelligent and humanistic responsibilities. For learners, responsible use of AI could make learning more fun, personalized, flexible, and enriching. This insightful new book explores the evolving role of educators in higher education in a world of rapid technological advancements and provides a practical outline of the available technologies. By integrating Generative AI into teaching and learning, Higher Education Institutions can contribute to achieving inclusive and equitable quality education, a target of the UN Sustainable Development Goals, and promote lifelong learning opportunities for all. Generative AI can be used to enhance teaching and learning experiences, foster creativity, and develop new learning experiences in higher education. This book is a valuable resource for educators navigating the ever-changing landscape of education technology. With scientific background, practical insights and actionable tips, this book will be of interest to scholars of emerging technologies and innovation in education. It will also be of practical use to instructors seeking to harness the power of generative AI, enhancing productivity and transforming their approach to personalized learning.
- 
    
Generative AI in Higher Education - The ChatGPG Effect by Cecilia Ka Yuk Chan; Tom CollotonCall Number: Available ONlineISBN: 9781032599045Publication Date: 2024-05-01Chan and Colloton's book is one of the first to provide a comprehensive examination of the use and impact of ChatGPT and Generative AI (GenAI) in higher education. Since November 2022, every conversation in higher education has involved ChatGPT and its impact on all aspects of teaching and learning. The book explores the necessity of AI literacy tailored to professional contexts, assess the strengths and weaknesses of incorporating ChatGPT in curriculum design, and delve into the transformation of assessment methods in the GenAI era. The authors introduce the Six Assessment Redesign Pivotal Strategies (SARPS) and an AI Assessment Integration Framework, encouraging a learner-centric assessment model. The necessity for well-crafted AI educational policies is explored, as well as a blueprint for policy formulation in academic institutions. Technical enthusiasts are catered to with a deep dive into the mechanics behind GenAI, from the history of neural networks to the latest advances and applications of GenAI technologies. With an eye on the future of AI in education, this book will appeal to educators, students and scholars interested in the wider societal implications and the transformative role of GenAI in pedagogy and research. The Open Access version of this book, available at www.taylorfrancis.com, has been made available under a Creative Commons Attribution-Non Commercial-No Derivatives (CC-BY-NC-ND) 4.0 license.
- 
    
Generative AI in Higher Education: Guiding Principles for Teaching and Learning by Emmanuel K NarteyCall Number: Available OnlineISBN: 9781032911267Publication Date: 2025-02-07Divided into two volumes, this book develops guiding principles for higher education institutions to use GenAI effectively and ethically in teaching and learning, articulating a roadmap for implementation at institutional levels and addressing the conundrum of using GenAI in higher education. As higher education institutions take different attitudes and approaches to Generative AI (GenAI), with some viewing it as a threat to academic integrity and therefore banning its use, while others have embraced it as an innovation to academic practice and have implemented guidance on how to use it ethically, this book makes clear that GenAI, such as ChatGPT, is not the problem itself; the issue is how we engage with it.
- 
    
Generative Artificial Intelligence by Jerry KaplanCall Number: Available OnlineISBN: 9780197773536Publication Date: 2024-02-19"AI expert Jerry Kaplan explains how generative AI will revolutionize virtually every human activity. Highly recommended." - Francis Fukuyama, Political scientist and author of The End of History and the Last Man Advances in Generative Artificial Intelligence (GAI) have created a new class of computer systems that exhibit astonishing proficiency on a wide variety of tasks with superhuman performance, producing novel text, images, music, and software by analyzing enormous collections of digitized information. Soon, these systems will provide expert medical care; offer legal advice; draft documents; write computer programs; tutor our children; and generate music and art. These advances will accelerate progress in science, art, and human knowledge, but they will also bring new dangers. Have we finally discovered the holy grail of AI - machines that match or exceed human intelligence? Which industries and professions will thrive, and which will wither? What risks and dangers will it pose? How can we ensure that these systems respect our ethical principles? Will the benefits be broadly distributed or accrue to a lucky few? How will GAI alter our political systems and international conflicts? Are we merely a stepping stone to a new form of non-biological life, or are we just getting better at building useful gadgets? Generative Artificial Intelligence: What Everyone Needs to Know ® equips readers with the knowledge to answer these pressing questions.
- 
    
Reimagining Literacy in the Age of AI by Jason D. Dehart (Editor); Suriati Abas (Editor); Raúl Alberto Mora (Editor); Damiana Gibbons Pyles (Editor)Call Number: Available OnlineISBN: 9781032839769Publication Date: 2025-04-17This volume assesses the critical intersection of artificial intelligence (AI) and literacy education. Drawing on the concept of "living literacies," it explores the transformative potential of AI in literacy practices, offering a comprehensive narrative that bridges theoretical frameworks with practical applications. The book goes beyond the conventional understanding of AI literacy as mere technological proficiency. Instead, it positions AI as a catalyst for expansive, inclusive, and multifaceted literacy practices in the digital age. Scholars from different parts of the world examine how AI is not just changing what we read and write but how we think, create, and express ourselves in a post-human context. KEY FEATURES Explores AI literacy that encompasses critical thinking, ethical reasoning, and creative expression Offers insights into the role of educators and researchers in cultivating AI literacy among learners Discusses how creativity and identity intertwine with AI literacy Suggests practical approaches to integrating AI into classroom instruction across different age groups This timely work serves as an essential guide for educators, researchers, and learners by navigating the evolving terrain of literacy in a world increasingly augmented by AI.
- 
    
Teaching AI - Exploring New Frontiers for Learning by Michelle ZimmermanCall Number: Available OnlineISBN: 9781564847058Publication Date: 2018-12-13Get the tools, resources and insights you need to explore artificial intelligence in the classroom and explore what students need to know about living in a world with AI. For many, artificial intelligence, or AI, may seem like science fiction, or inherently overwhelming. The reality is that AI is already being applied in industry and, for many of us, in our daily lives as well. A better understanding of AI can help you make informed decisions in the classroom that will impact the future of your students. Drawing from a broad variety of expert voices from countries including Australia, Japan, and South Africa, as well as educators from around the world and underrepresented student voices, this book explores some of the ways AI can improve education. These include educating learners about AI, teaching them about living in a world where they will be surrounded by AI and helping educators understand how they can use AI to augment human ability. Each chapter offers activities and questions to help you deepen your understanding, try out new concepts and reflect on the information presented. Links to media artifacts from trusted sources will help make your learning experience more dynamic while also providing additional resources to use in your classroom. This book: Offers a unique approach to the topic, with chapter opening scenes, case studies, and featured student voices. Discusses a variety of ways to teach students about AI, through design thinking, project-based learning and STEM connections. Includes lesson ideas, activities and tools for exploring AI with your students. Includes references to films and other media you can use in class to start discussions on AI or inspire design thinking and STEM projects. In Teaching AI, you'll learn what AI is, how it works and how to use it to better prepare students in a world with increased human-computer interaction.
- 
    
Teaching and Learning in the Age of Generative AI by Joseph Rene Corbeil (Editor); Maria Elena Corbeil (Editor)Call Number: Available OnlineISBN: 9781032688596Publication Date: 2025-04-30Teaching and Learning in the Age of Generative AI explores how educators can effectively harness the potential of artificial intelligence technologies while skillfully navigating its pedagogical, technical, ethical, institutional, and societal implications. The increasing accessibility of AI technologies among K-12 and higher education students has raised extensive concerns around academic integrity, though a deeper lineage of research and development suggests that these tools may be used to supplement instruction, prioritize critical thinking, and promote digital literacy. Bookended by in-depth analyses of the historical and future trajectories of artificial intelligence in education, this comprehensive resource provides evidence-based strategies for classroom implementation and helpful summaries of common benefits and risks. Teaching assistance, personalized learning, redefined assessments, anti-bias measures, and safeguards against misconduct and privacy infringement are among the wealth of topics addressed in these chapters. This book is an ideal text for undergraduate and graduate students of teacher education and curriculum and instruction as well as for higher education teaching faculty, school technology coordinators, and talent development personnel in training and in service.
- 
    
Teaching with AI - A Practical Guide to a New Era of Human learni g by José Antonio Bowen; C. Edward WatsonCall Number: Available OnlineISBN: 9781421449234Publication Date: 2024-04-30How AI is revolutionizing the future of learning and how educators can adapt to this new era of human thinking. Artificial Intelligence (AI) is revolutionizing the way we learn, work, and think. Its integration into classrooms and workplaces is already underway, impacting and challenging ideas about creativity, authorship, and education. In this groundbreaking and practical guide, teachers will discover how to harness and manage AI as a powerful teaching tool. José Antonio Bowen and C. Edward Watson present emerging and powerful research on the seismic changes AI is already creating in schools and the workplace, providing invaluable insights into what AI can accomplish in the classroom and beyond. By learning how to use new AI tools and resources, educators will gain the confidence to navigate the challenges and seize the opportunities presented by AI. From interactive learning techniques to advanced assignment and assessment strategies, this comprehensive guide offers practical suggestions for integrating AI effectively into teaching and learning environments. Bowen and Watson tackle crucial questions related to academic integrity, cheating, and other emerging issues. In the age of AI, critical thinking skills, information literacy, and a liberal arts education are more important than ever. As AI continues to reshape the nature of work and human thinking, educators can equip students with the skills they need to thrive in a rapidly evolving world. This book serves as a compass, guiding educators through the uncharted territory of AI-powered education and the future of teaching and learning.
- 
    
Using Generative AI Effectively in Higher Education by Sue Beckingham (Editor); Jenny Lawrence (Editor); Stephen Powell (Editor); Peter Hartley (Editor)Call Number: Available OnlineISBN: 9781032773988Publication Date: 2024-06-14Using Generative AI Effectively in Higher Education explores how higher education providers can realise their role and responsibility in harnessing the power of generative artificial intelligence (GenAI) ethically and sustainably. This rich collection of established and evaluated practices from across global higher education offers a practical guide to leading an agile institutional response to emerging technologies, building critical digital literacy across an entire institution, and embedding the ethical and sustainable use of GenAI in teaching, learning, and assessment. Including reflections from stakeholders testifying to the value of the approaches outlined, the book examines how higher education can equip staff and students with the critical-digital literacy necessary to use GenAI in work, study, and social life responsibly and with integrity. It provides an evidence-based resource for any kind of higher education (HE) provider (modern, college-based, and research-focused) looking for inspiration and approaches which can build GenAI capability and includes chapters on the development of cross-institutional strategy, policies and processes, pedagogic practices, and critical-digital literacy. This resource will be invaluable to educational leaders, educational developers, learning developers, learning technologists, course administrators, quality assurance staff, and HE teachers wishing to embrace and adapt to a GenAI-enabled world.
Pratschke, B. Mairead (2024). Generative AI and Education : Digital Pedagogies, Teaching Innovation and Learning Design. Available Online. Springer. This volume addresses the gap in knowledge around generative AI and its applications in education. It draws on the recent history of technological innovation and digital pedagogies, locating generative AI in the contemporary discourse around education futures. It argues that a new hybrid model of education is emerging, requiring educational institutions to embed generative AI into course and programme design, delivery and assessment. It also proposes a shift from a focus on learning as output to learning as a process, and explores what that shift might look like. Grounded in educational theory, it offers actionable pedagogy-informed guidance on how to position AI as a collaborator in the construction of learning in a manner that is congruent with the values and aims of education. It offers advice based on evidence-based digital pedagogy, including frameworks for effective teaching and learning with generative AI, that enable educators and designers to put these ideas into practice.
- Last Updated: Aug 13, 2026 4:08 PM
- URL: https://libguides.usc.edu/ai-teach
- Print Page

"AI literacy goes beyond understanding AI tools; it equips individuals to critically evaluate, ethically navigate, and practically apply AI in real-world scenarios; [it is] is the ability to understand, use, and think critically about AI technologies and their impact on society, ethics, and everyday life. (…)
This broad definition, provided by Leo S.Lo in his article [Lo, L. (2025). AI Literacy: A Guide for Academic Libraries. College &Research Libraries News, 86(3), 120-122] encompasses several interconnected components, each essential for developing a well-rounded understanding of AI. Lo provides a guide to AI literacy that addresses technical, ethical, critical, and societal dimensions of AI.
Several AI Literacy Frameworks are now available (See below). They provide a roadmap for individuals to navigate the increasingly AI-driven world, ensuring they can critically evaluate AI outputs, understand its limitations, and use it effectively and ethically.
An AI literacy framework equips individuals with the knowledge and skills to understand, evaluate, and use AI systems and tools ethically and effectively. It emphasizes critical thinking, responsible AI usage, and awareness of potential biases and limitations.
Key Components of an AI Literacy Framework:
Understanding AI Basics: This includes grasping fundamental concepts like machine learning, neural networks, and different types of AI (e.g., narrow AI, general AI).
Evaluating AI Systems: Critically assessing the strengths and weaknesses of AI systems, including their potential biases, limitations, and ethical implications.
Using AI Responsibly: Applying AI tools and systems in a way that is ethical, safe, and beneficial, while being mindful of potential misuse.
Ethical Considerations: Understanding the ethical implications of AI, such as fairness, accountability, and transparency.
AI Pedagogy: Learning how to effectively use AI in educational settings to enhance teaching and learning.
Self-Reflection and Continuous Learning: Recognizing the need for continuous learning and self-reflection to stay current with the evolving landscape of AI technologies.
Human-Centered Approach: Emphasizing the importance of human skills like critical thinking, creativity, and emotional intelligence when interacting with AI.

AI is constantly changing every aspect of our daily routines. One area where its influence is particularly evident is the reshaping of the education landscape where AI is is rapidly transforming education offering new ways to learn teach and acquire skills.
Key trends include:
- Personalized Learning, - an educational approach that tailors instruction and learning experiences to meet the unique needs, interests, and strengths of each individual student. It moves away from a one-size-fits-all model and emphasizes creating customized learning paths that allow students to engage with content in ways that best suit their individual learning styles and preferences. This can involve creating adaptive learning platforms that adjust to a student's strengths and weaknesses in real-time.
See: Hughey, Judy (2020) "Individual Personalized Learning," Educational Considerations: Vol. 46: No. 2.
- Intelligent Tutoring Systems (ITS), Intelligent Tutoring Systems (ITS) - computer programs designed to provide personalized and adaptive instruction to learners. They use AI techniques to understand a student's learning needs and adjust the learning environment accordingly, simulating a one-on-one tutoring experience. ITSs can track student progress, offer feedback, provide hints, and select appropriate problems or tasks. For examples of ITS see: https://www.park.edu/blog/ai-in-education-the-rise-of-intelligent-tutoring-systems/
- AI-powered Adaptive Learning - a personalized approach to education and training that tailors the learning experience to the unique needs and progress of each individual learner.It uses data and algorithms to adjust the content, difficulty, pace, and format of the learning material in real-time, creating a dynamic and individualized learning path.
See: Kabudi, Tumaini , Ilias Pappas, and Dag Håkon Olsen (2021). “AI-enabled Adaptive Learning Systems: A Systematic Mapping of the Literature”, Computers and Education: Artificial Intelligence,Vol. 2.
- In addition AI is being used to create engaging learning experiences through gamification and immersive technologies like VR/AR (Virtual Reality/Augmented Reality), and to automate administrative tasks, freeing up educators' time.
See the video 8 Ways AI’s Changing the Education Industry! Jul 26, 2024 13.55 min.

Choice White Paper: Hervieux, Sandy, and Amanda Wheatley (2024). “Building an AI Literacy Framework: Perspectives from Instruction Librarians and Current Information Literacy Tools” Choice White Paper.
Executive Summary: With growing discussions around generative AI tools such as ChatGPT, librarians are now confronted with accessible AI technology that students are using to offset their research and writing tasks. Information literacy frameworks and standards have traditionally helped librarians plan their instruction sessions; however, these structures do not address AI. Many librarian-led workshops have started to appear to help students create chat prompts, verify the information provided by ChatGPT, and use AI tools critically. While some discussion has started around the ACRL Framework for Information Literacy and the place of AI within it, we propose that a new framework is needed to address all the complexities of artificial intelligence. This white paper aims to report on interviews with instruction librarians about AI literacy. From the analysis of the interviews, we will identify the main themes and concerns related to AI and develop a robust framework for AI literacy. Readers of the white paper should gain a better understanding of the place of AI literacy in information literacy instruction and be able to use a rigorous structure to plan their own interventions.
Digital Education Council AI Literacy Framework. “The Digital Education Council AI Literacy framework takes a human-centered approach to AI literacy, emphasising the importance of human skills such as critical thinking, creativity, and emotional intelligence. / It offers higher education institutions with structured guidance on developing AI literacy approaches that will equip individuals with key foundational AI competencies and industry-specific applications.”
Digital Promise Framework: As artificial intelligence (AI) becomes increasingly prevalent in our daily lives and educational settings, it is imperative to equip learners, educators, and leaders with the necessary skills and knowledge to navigate this emerging technology responsibly. Our AI Literacy Framework (depicted below) consists of three interconnected Modes of Engagement: Understand, Evaluate, and Use. The framework emphasizes that understanding and evaluating AI are critical to making informed decisions about if and how to use AI in learning environments.
Digital Promise is a global nonprofit working to expand opportunity for every learner. Working with a wide range of partners and practitioners in the U.S. and around the world, our initiatives have impacted over 4.4 million students and 180,000 teachers across 173 districts and in 27 countries to date.
Educause:
Kassorla, Michelle, Maya Georgieva, and Allison Papini (2024). “AI Literacy in Teaching and Learning: A Durable Framework for Higher Education,” Educause, October 17, 2024.
This report presents a comprehensive framework for AI Literacy in Teaching and Learning (ALTL) in higher education, addressing the need for institutions to adapt to the rapidly evolving landscape of artificial intelligence (AI). The framework equips students, faculty, and staff to engage effectively and ethically with AI technologies in academic and professional contexts. / ALTL involves understanding AI fundamentals, critically evaluating AI applications, and maintaining vigilance against misuse and bias. The framework provides tailored definitions, competencies, and outcomes for students, faculty, and staff, focusing on four key areas: Technical Understanding, Evaluative Skills, Practical Application, and Ethical Considerations.
Educause Review:
Turner, Patricia (2025). “Mapping a Multidimensional Framework for GenAI in Education,” Educause Review. April 1, 2025. "Prompting careful dialogue through incisive questions can help chart a course through the ongoing storm of artificial intelligence."
Hibbert, Melanie, Elana Altman, Tristan Shippen, and Melissa Wright (2024). “A Framework for AI Literacy,” Educause Review, June 2, 2024. "Academic and technologies teams at Barnard College developed an AI literacy framework to provide a conceptual foundation for AI education and programming eﬀorts in higher education institutional contexts."
Stanford Teaching Commons: Understanding AI Literacy – This module introduces a framework that identifies and organizes skills and knowledge that you can use to navigate the challenges and opportunities of generative AI technology in education in more thoughtful ways. / After completing this module, you should be able to:
UNESCO Digital Literacy Global Network (2023). Artificial Intelligence (AI) is rapidly transforming our world and changing the way we live, work and learn. To help education systems keep pace, UNESCO is launching two new AI competency frameworks - one for students and one for teachers.

The research databases listed below provide a rich and multifaceted array of search results on many aspects of AI in Education as well as its subset: Ai literacy.
Knowing how a specific database uses the terms entered in the search box may make all the difference in your being able to find what you need quickly and effectively. In addition, narrowing your search by selecting "Advanced Search" and by using boolean operators (logical operators like AND, OR, and NOT) to narrow or broaden search results) can also be productive.
For example: AI AND literacy and selecting the Abstract Field to limit the search should narrow your search effectively.
USC Libraries Guides to Help You in Your Searches
A. See the following USC Libraries Guide and Workshop:
--Kelsey Vukic: Searching Solutions: Keywords vs Indexed - Understanding how searching changes from search engine to database. (Research Guide)
--Bridgid Fennell and Kelsey Vukic : AI Literature Mapping Tools . (Slides of Workshop, 26 March 2025). Objectives: After attending this workshop, you will be able to: Explain how to use AI tools to find articles for your literature review; Use a “seed article” to retrieve relevant citations in an AI literature mapping tool; State the capabilities and drawbacks of AI literature mapping tools.
B. The USC Libraries' tutorial Developing Keywords can help you practice identifying potential keywords to search a database.
C. Please Note: if you are unable to access something you know we have, visit: When the Link Doesn't Work

The number of AI Tools currently available for teaching and research is substantial. This page provides an overview of this topic so that teaching faculty/instructors and students may be aware of the current scope of this technology.
AI tools are software applications that use artificial intelligence algorithms to perform tasks that typically require human intelligence, such as analyzing data, recognizing patterns, personalize learning experiences, automate tasks, and making decisions.
AI technologies encompass the broader field of developing and implementing AI systems. Such technologies are used in a very large number of applications which have led to self-driving cars, speech recognition systems, and fraud detection in banking, to name just a few. Examples of technologies that enable AI to solve complex problems include robotics, and virtual agents.
Component of AI technologies include:
Computer vision (Allows computers to "see" and interpret images)
Deep learning (A type of machine learning that uses artificial neural networks to analyze complex data).
Machine learning (Algorithms that allow computers to learn from data without being explicitly programmed),
Natural language processing (Enables computers to understand, interpret, and generate human language),
Examples of AI tools in teaching and learning include:
adaptive learning platforms (to tailor content and pace to individual student needs),
AI-driven lesson planning,
AI-powered assessment tools,
AI-powered chatbots (such as ChatGPT),
automated grading,
lecture transcription platforms,
plagiarism detection software
all aimed at improving student learning outcomes and teaching effectiveness.
In essence, AI tools are specific applications that leverage AI technologies to perform tasks, while AI technologies are the broader field of developing and implementing these tools and systems.
The application of AI technologies in teaching and learning serves to enhance the teaching and learning process, addressing cognitive, physical, academic, social, and emotional factors that impact learning.
The list below provides an overview of the most used Generative AI Tools. They may appear as a line item in Teaching Grants or Funding Applications, and include training support as part of the budget proposal.
Te xt Generation:
ChatGPT is a large language model (LLM) and chatbot developed by OpenAI that uses artificial intelligence to generate human-like text and engage in conversations. Based on user prompts, it can respond to questions, write various types of content, and even debug code. ChatGPT is trained on a massive dataset of text and code, allowing it to understand and generate natural language. It uses a technique called reinforcement learning with human feedback (RLHF) to optimize its ability to have natural and engaging conversations.
Image Generation:
DALL-E is a family of artificial intelligence models developed by OpenAI that can generate images from text descriptions. It uses deep learning to understand natural language prompts and create realistic and artistic visuals. DALL-E has evolved through several versions, with DALL-E 3 being the latest iteration, known for its ability to produce highly detailed and accurate images
Music Generation:
Text-to-image Generators:
Midjourney is a generative artificial intelligence program that creates images from natural language descriptions (prompts). It is a text-to-image AI: you input text and it generates an image based on that description. Midjourney utilizes large language models and diffusion models, which allow it to understand and interpret the meaning of your prompts, transforming them into numerical representations that guide the image generation process.
For additional Information see:
Popular Generative Toolsets (University of South Florida Libraries Research Guide).
Artificial Intelligence (Generative Resources) (Georgetown University Library Research Guide)
"Find the Best Ai Tools!," AITopTools, (This is repository of AI Tools organized by categories that go well beyond "Education") .
Lukan, Ema. “The 50 Best AI Tools for 2025 (Tried and Tested),” Synthesia, March 30, 2025.

Generative AI (GenAI) has a wide range of potential applications, including:
Art and design: Creating unique images, music, and other creative works.
Content creation: Generating articles, blog posts, social media content, and more.
Education: Creating educational materials and personalized learning experiences.
Product development: Designing new products and prototypes.
Research: Simulating data for research purposes.
ETHICAL CONCERNS
Bias and Fairness: GenAI models can perpetuate or amplify biases present in their training data, leading to unfair or discriminatory outcomes.
Data Privacy and Security: The large datasets used to train GenAI models raise concerns about data security and privacy, especially when sensitive or proprietary information is involved.
Intellectual Property: The ability of GenAI to generate content autonomously raises questions about ownership and potential copyright infringements.
Misinformation and Hallucinations: GenAI systems can produce incorrect or misleading information, sometimes referred to as "hallucinations," requiring users to critically evaluate the output.
PRACTICAL CHALLENGES
Cost and Resource Allocation: Implementing and maintaining GenAI solutions can be costly, requiring careful planning and resource allocation.
Computational Resources: Training GenAI models demands substantial computational resources, including high-performance GPUs and significant memory.
Data Quality and Accuracy: GenAI models require vast amounts of high-quality data, but managing and ensuring the accuracy of such large datasets is a challenge.
Energy Demand: GenAI workloads contribute to increasing electricity usage in data centers, raising concerns about energy availability and cost.
Integration with Existing Systems: Integrating GenAI into existing IT infrastructure and workflows can be complex and resource-intensive, requiring compatibility and changes in processes.
Interpretability: Understanding how GenAI models make decisions and why they produce certain outputs can be challenging, particularly with complex models.
Regulatory Compliance: The varying and evolving regulatory landscape for AI can make it difficult for businesses to comply with all relevant laws and regulations.
Scalability and Complexity: Scaling GenAI solutions from pilot projects to enterprise-wide deployments can be challenging, and maintaining these solutions over time requires ongoing resources.
SOCIETAL AND ECONOMIC CHALLENGES
Misinformation and Disinformation: The ease with which GenAI can generate realistic content can be used to spread misinformation and disinformation, potentially impacting public discourse and trust.
Plagiarism and Academic Integrity: The ability of GenAI to generate academic papers and other forms of content can pose challenges to academic integrity and the assessment of student learning.
Social Impact: The widespread adoption of GenAI can have far-reaching social impacts, including changes in how people learn, work, and interact with each other.

USC Libraries Research Guide:
Using Generative AI in Research, by Michaela Ullmann in collaboration with Benjamin Hall, Mike Jones, and Clarissa Moreno.
Generative AI (GenAI) is a type of artificial intelligence that can create new content, like text, images, music, videos, or code, by learning patterns from existing data and then generating novel outputs based on those patterns.
GenAI models are trained on massive datasets, allowing them to identify and learn the underlying structures and relationships within the data. Once trained, these models can generate new content that resembles the data they were trained on, but is not simply a copy of that data.
The earliest form of GenAI is the development of Chatbots. Marie Gobiet's "The History of Chatbots - From ELIZA to ChatGPT" (Onlim, 15 February 2024), provides a very detailed list (14 items) and description of the many forms of chatbots starting with the very first chatbot which was developed by MIT professor Joseph Weizenbaum in the 1960s. It was called ELIZA: it uses pattern matching and substitution methodology to simulate conversation. The program was designed in a way that it mimics human conversation. The Chatbot ELIZA worked by passing the words that users entered into a computer and then pairing them to a list of possible scripted responses. It uses a script that simulated a psychotherapist.
Generative AI (GenAI) is still limited in what it can accomplish due to its reliance on data-driven algorithms. While these algorithms may be able to recognize patterns or trends within data sets, they have difficulty understanding context when presented with new information or scenarios outside of their training parameters. Hence GenAI cannot draw conclusions or make decisions based on complex situations — activities that only humans can do at present. Furthermore, GenAI cannot replace human creativity completely as it lacks the ability to formulate novel ideas or recognize abstract concepts such as humor or irony, all of which require a human touch.
While GenAI has the potential to revolutionize many aspects of our lives by taking over time-intensive creative tasks and providing business insights — it still has its limitations. There will always be some tasks which will require human intervention in order for them to truly succeed. As such, we must ensure that we use this tool responsibly if we want it to reach its full potential without sacrificing our own ingenuity in the process.
For an informative analysis of Ai in Education see: U.S. Department of Education, Office of Educational Technology, Artificial Intelligence and Future of Teaching and Learning: Insights and Recommendations, Washington, DC, 2023. (67 pages) .
This report addresses the clear need for sharing knowledge and developing policies for “Artificial Intelligence,” a rapidly advancing class of foundational capabilities which are increasingly embedded in all types of educational technology systems and are also available to the public. We will consider “educational technology” (edtech) to include both (a) technologies specifically designed for educational use, as well as (b) general technologies that are widely used in educational settings. Recommendations in this report seek to engage teachers, educational leaders, policy makers, researchers, and educational technology innovators and providers as they work together on pressing policy issues that arise as Artificial Intelligence (AI) is used in education.

For a listing of research guides relating to AI see the following USC Libraries Research guides:
AI and the Digital Humanities by Danielle Mihram. This Guide focuses on the digital transformation and innovation in Digital Humanities (DH) research and scholarship together with Artificial Intelligence (AI) as a catalyst for scalable advancements.
AI@USC in Benjamin Hall's Research Guide, Artificial Intelligence for Business. "This guide was created as an attempt to organize the influx of AI trends, tools, and ethical incidents that are material to the business world. The pages herein are not perfect, they are not an endorsement of AI or any AI tool, and the guide is a continual work-in-progress."
Using Generative AI in Research, by Michaela Ullmann in collaboration with Benjamin Hall, Mike Jones, and Clarissa Moreno. This Research Guide provides information on the use of Generative AI in academic papers and research, and provides guidance on the ethical use of Generative AI in an academic setting."
This Guide (prepared for our USC Community - Faculty, Students, and Staff) focuses on Artificial Intelligence (AI) literacy research and scholarship in the broad field of teaching and learning. The rapid evolution of this field necessitates frequent updates as well as information emendations in order for us to remain fully aware of its many facets. Consequently, this guide will regularly monitor and include recent trends of this field so that we may successfully and productively network and collaborate with the AI and teaching/learning communities and scholars both at USC and nationwide.
I invite you to communicate with me, Danielle Mihram, if you would like to find information on AI within the Education and Teaching and Learning fields that would help you in your teaching and research.
Additional pages that further reveal the scope of AI in teaching and learning are currently under development.
AI (Artificial Intelligence) is commonly defined as the ability of a machine to perform cognitive functions we associate with human minds, such as perceiving, reasoning, learning, and problem solving. This guide includes information about a range of possible AI educational applications. It provides an overview of AI’s role in learning, thinking, and human communication, thus facilitating the work of educators to prepare students about information integrity, as well as AI’s adverse impacts, such as learning loss, and increased inequity.
This leads to an understanding of "AI literacy", i.e., gaining skills that enable you to use AI effectively and ethically in ways that support teaching and learning.
AI can empower educators, accelerate learning, and personalize educational experiences, quickly and easily. On the other hand, the risks of bias, misinformation, and student isolation demand careful scrutiny. Balancing the advantages of artificial intelligence in education with its potential drawbacks requires careful planning and consideration, as well as ongoing evaluation.
Parikh, Amita (2024). D2L’s AI in Education Glossary, (Blog entry, June 10, 2024).
Ruiz, Pati and Judi Fusco (2024), Glossary of Artificial Intelligence Terms for Educators, Center for Integrative Research in Computing and Learning Sciences (CIRCLS), Last updated on March 31, 2024.